Choking
The information below is for choking in adults and children over 1 year old.

Mild choking
If the airway is only partly blocked, the person will usually be able to speak, cry, cough or breathe. In situations like this, a person will usually be able to clear the blockage themselves.

If choking is mild:

encourage the person to cough to try to clear the blockage
ask them to try to spit out the object if it’s in their mouth
don’t put your fingers in their mouth to help them because they may accidentally bite you
If coughing doesn’t work, start back blows.

Severe choking 
If choking is severe, the person won’t be able to speak, cry, cough or breathe, and without help they’ll eventually become unconscious.

To help an adult or child over 1 year old:

Stand behind the person and slightly to one side. Support their chest with one hand. Lean the person forward so that the object blocking their airway will come out of their mouth, rather than moving further down.
Give up to 5 sharp blows between the person’s shoulder blades with the heel of your hand (the heel is between the palm of your hand and your wrist).
Check if the blockage has cleared.
If not, give up to 5 abdominal thrusts.
Abdominal thrusts shouldn’t be used on babies under 1 year old, pregnant women or obese people.

To perform abdominal thrusts on a person who is severely choking and isn’t in one of the above groups:

Stand behind the person who is choking.
Place your arms around their waist and bend them well forward.
Clench one fist and place it just above the person’s belly button.
Place your other hand on top of your fist and pull sharply inwards and upwards.
Repeat this up to 5 times.
The aim is to get the obstruction out with each chest thrust, rather than necessarily doing all 5.

If the obstruction doesn’t clear after 3 cycles of back blows and chest thrusts, phone 999 to ask for an ambulance, and continue until help arrives.

The person choking should always be seen by a healthcare professional afterwards to check for any injuries or small pieces of the obstruction that remain.